# Updates
    
*Originally published on [2015-09-23](https://6guts.wordpress.com/2015/09/23/updates/) by Jonathan Worthington.*

It’s amazing just how long has gone by since I last wrote something here. I intend to get back to writing weekly posts about my Raku work again starting around now, but here’s a few big-picture updates of what I’ve been up to.

First came YAPC::Asia. I gave a talk on Raku’s concurrent, parallel, and asynchronous features; the [slides](http://jnthn.net/papers/2015-yapcasia-concurrency.pdf) as well as a [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JpqnNCx7wVY) are available. The talk was well received, and I was happy to have some interesting questions at the end. I was also happy to find myself talking with some Go compiler folks during the conference dinner; of course, we talked about concurrency models, and plenty besides. While the conference was great, and I’m glad I took up the invitation to go and speak there, my body basically refused to sleep at local night time. Given I’d only just managed to get shake off the exhaustion that had been troubling me for a while before the trip, this was rather sub-optimal – and meant I was pretty much beat by the time I got back home. Just in time for…the Swiss Perl Workshop.

Switzerland is, thankfully, in the same timezone as Prague, so no trouble with being able to sleep on a night! And the hotel was very comfortable too. Sadly, I still arrived to the workshop really quite exhausted – no thanks to needing to make the trip from Prague to Zurich via a night in Stockholm for annoying immigration-related reasons (I’m generally appreciative of the time the Schengen agreement saves me, but there’s certainly some improvement needed). Despite my tiredness, it was still a useful time. Day 1 was a hackathon, and lots of GLR-related decisions got made – much thanks to having the right people in the same room. On day 2, I gave my concurrency talk again, along with a [talk on NFG](http://jnthn.net/papers/2015-spw-nfg.pdf). And on day 3, I taught a day-long [Raku introduction course](http://jnthn.net/papers/2015-spw-rakuourse.pdf) – to a totally full room.

Despite feeling dizzy and exhausted in some periods, SPW was a great time. But by the time it was over, I really felt my body telling me I was pushing it way too far. The mere thought of getting on another flight gave me a headache. So, sadly I ended up cancelling my trip to YAPC::Europe this year. After attending 10 years worth of YAPC::Europe conferences in a row, I was sad to miss it – and it was a pity to have to cancel my session there too. Happily, *lizmat*++ stepped up to take my slot and deliver my concurrency talk – which she’d already seen in Japan and Switzerland. I spent several days offline, working my way back home overland with a couple of stops in Austria, thankfully with my wife to take good care of me along the way.

In terms of big Raku implementation news: in the days between my last post here and YAPC::Asia, I got the GLR (Great List Refactor) to a point where others could contribute. And contribute they did! A special mention goes to *nine*++, who put in an incredible amount of work, meaning that I could merge the GLR work in early September. Since then we’ve been working through various details, but things are looking really good there.

Obviously, I’ve been having to take it somewhat easy in the last weeks. It’s going to be a while before I’m back to full health, and critically I need to avoid doing too much. I’ve been finding a decent amount of time to do Raku things, but with limited energy have prioritized doing things (and helping others do things) rather than writing about doing things. By this point, I think I’ll be able to get back to regular progress reports again, so you’ll have those to look forward to. I’ll hopefully have one out for the last week or so sometime near the weekend.
